<p>

# Aaron Money (aa746663)<br>

# EEL 5862<br>

# 09/07/2025<br>

# Application 1

## Thematic Application: Space Systems</p> 

<p>Q1. Vary Priorities: Change the print task’s priority to 2 (higher than blink’s 1). With such short tasks and delays, you may not notice a big difference, but in principle the print task would preempt the blink task if it were ready. Given both tasks spend most time sleeping, the effect is minimal. In later projects with CPU-bound tasks, priority will matter more. Does anything happen to the LED if you increase the delay within the print task? What if you increase the number of characters printed?</p><p>In the case of developing a satellite software that transmits telemetry data on time, modifying the delay of the when the telemtry data is transmitted does not noticeably affect the satellite's beacon blink pattern. This is because modifying the delay in the telemetry data transmission doesn't change the fact that it is still sleeping when it is not prompted to transmit.</p><p>Q2. Increase Load: Remove the vTaskDelay in the print task (making it a tight loop printing continuously). Be careful – this will flood the console. But it illustrates a point: if one task never yields, it can starve the other. In this case, the LED might stop blinking on schedule because the print task hogs the CPU. This is a starvation scenario, leading into Project 2. If you try this, reset it back after observing a few lines, to avoid crashing your serial output. Describe the behavior you observed.</p><p>When removing the delay for when the satellite telemetry data is transmitted, the satellite beacon blinking pattern would be disrupted. As time continues, the beacon blink delay gets progressively longer due to it being starved by the constant transmission of telemetry data because of the telemetry transmission (which still has a higher priority than the beacon pattern) is hogging all of the CPU.</p><p>Q3. Thematic Customization: If you chose the space context, perhaps change the printed message to “Telemetry OK” or similar. In healthcare, print a pseudo heart rate. In security, print sensor status.  Assume you were a developer of one of these applications - might there be some considerations that you would want to take into consideration in how verbose (or not) you want your messages to be? Additionally, explain why this system benefits from having correct functionality at predictable times.</p><p>As a developer of a program for satellite telemetry data transmission, the transmission message should be appropriately detailed. Telemetry data consists of many different metrics and parameters, such as various tempurature, voltage, and position measurements. Transmitting the data at the correct time is important because most if not all telemetry parameters are not static but rather dynamic. An example would be the status of a subsystem such as a thruster, which can have a mechanical failure at a given time.</p><p>Q4. Identify/Verify the period of each task; you can try to do this via the simulator, or perhaps by printing data to the console, or connect the outputs to the logic analyzer.<br>a. Describe how you measure the periods:<br>b. LED blink task period:<br>c. Print task period:</p><p>The period for the beacon blink task and the telemetry data transmission task can be measured using a printf statement in each function. For example, for the data transmission task, you can write in printf("Telemetry OK @ %lu\n,[period = %lu]", currentTime, currentTime-previousTime);. Tthe data transmission period is 20 seconds and the beacon blink period is 300 milliseconds in this case.</p><p>Q5. Did our system tasks meet the timing requirements? How do you know? How did you verify it?</p><p>Despite the periods being fairly accurate, the system tasks do not meet hard real-time system requirements. There was around an extra 100-200 millisecond delay in the data transmission than there should have been. I verified this by pausing the code at 20 seconds, and the telemetry transmission had yet to be sent, running around 182 milliseconds late.</p><p>Q6. If the LED task had been written in a single-loop with the print (see baseline super-loop code), you might have seen the LED timing disturbed by printing (especially if printing took variable time). Did you try running the code? Can you cause the LED to miss it's timing requirements? If yes, how?
If no, what did you try?</p><p>After testing the single loop code, the LED misses its timing requirments vastly because of the fact that the longprint functions is called inside in the same function the LED loop is written in, so the LED loop will be sleeping for the duration of the print message delay written in the longprint funciton</p><p>Q7. Do you agree or disagree: By using multitasking, we were able to achieve timing determinism for the LED blink. Why or why not?</p><p>I would disagree with the fact that timing determinism is fully acheived. While the periods of each function are very accurate, the slight 100-200 millisecond delay breaks the requirements for a hard real-time system.</p><p>AI Usage: ChatGPT used to explain satellite telemtry data transmission in detail<br>https://chatgpt.com/s/t_68c0e72992e88191a6f130782e945049</p>
